---
title: "Crypto is an alien planet to Wall Street"
date: 2017-10-23 13:00
comments: true
categories: blog
tags: bitcoin
image: /posts/2017-10-23-crypto-and-traditional-fiannce.jpg
---

I was thinking about the relationship between traditional financial
system and the parallel crypto world, about hard forks and the fight
between big blockers, bigger blockers and core.

I find all this completely funny, but in a totally different way
than most people. If you look at traditional finance (gonna call
them Wall Street), they are sometimes jerks in private (famous recording from
a private bank meeting), but they would not normally tell anyone
to eat shit at a conference or start a twitter flame-war (except
for Nassim Nicholas Taleb, but he is almost always right).

<!--more-->

For traditional finance people, this clash with "geek hate culture"
is like landing on an alien planet, they have no idea what's going
on, they don't understand it is business as usual for most geeks.
Maybe you remember Theo de Raadt insulting users and developers of
NetBSD, for which he had to leave NetBSD and started OpenBSD.

But it is not only the hate part, this is where the clash is most
visible. You cannot do a pull request on FED. You don't let market
decide which currency wins or even what kind of securities people
prefer. There is no US dollar hard fork for people who want to have
strong deflationary currency.

This shows that the parallel financial system is going to be way
different, because of a completely different culture. Maybe the
relationship is like when the Go players were playing against
AlphaGo (the Google AI algorithm that won against the best player
of Go). It used moves that were completely alien, no human was
playing like that, because the game strategy was part of the culture.
And that's one of the reasons AlphaGo won and that's why Go players
are now learning from AlphaGo and are becoming more "alien" themselves.

I think this is a pretty good analogy, the rules of the game are
the same (markets, supply and demand, money, lowering transaction
costs, unit of account, ...), but this world looks completely weird
to traditional finance people.

The "Wall street people" have some idea what is going on, but still
it's a different world and there are some things they don't understand
at all.

Why would people buy weird coins generated by some geeks for €5000?

And I think it's mostly working because people are fed up (pun intended) with
privacy invasions, loss of banking secrecy and taxation. And of
course many people are drunk on bull markets and hope they will
make a fortune.

But the classical wall street people don't understand this at all
yet.

Wall Street has been in bed with the state for too long. I am not
only talking about bailouts and moral hazard, that's just the end
result. Tell any bank a funny story about suitcases with cash and they
get an immediate allergic reaction. They have become cops, tax
enforcers and so much embedded in the system that they cannot imagine
these new approaches. They are both alien and frightening, because
the first question that comes to their mind with any new venture
is "will we get away with it"? If the answer is no, the second
question is "who will lobby so we could do it?".

And in current crypto world, these questions have a completely
different meaning. The largest cryptocurrency is Bitcoin, the author
is pseudonymous and he gets away with it by definition, because no one
knows.

What is interesting is the fact that people use this system anyway.
Imagine there would be a bank run by people you cannot jail and you
don't know who they are. They might be Chinese, Russians, Americans,
part of Columbian drug cartel, you don't know. Would you find it a good
idea to buy their tokens and transact? In a Wall Street world, the
answer is no. In crypto, the answer is yes, conditional on the fact
that source code is available and the governance model is sane. You
build trust by making a product that works, not by your Princeton
graduation certificate and license from the state.

And this is why I am into cryptos these days. I do not think that
the prices will go up indefinitely, I don't count on one Bitcoin being
worth one million dollars. I value the culture. Even if they sometimes
tell me to eat shit, I value that contributions are open and we are
all building this nice beautiful thing and it does not matter that
I studied computer science and the next guy didn't even go to school.
People choose (and make mistakes) based on the results. And I want to
be part of this culture, it is open-source culture on steroids.

But there's one more important point. And it comes back to hard forks.
Most people don't care about geeky stuff. They don't care if it is nicer
to put signatures in the blocks or separate them. They don't care about
our merkle trees and scalability.

Money and finance is a social system. People care about things such as:
"Can I pay with this? Is it cheap? Is it fast? Is it secure?". We
geeks tend to focus on geeky stuff, but that's not the role of finance.
When I use euros, I don't care how they look, I have zero interest in
knowing what kind of operating system do SEPA/TARGET2 systems run on.

On the other hand, things like speed are important. I recently tried
to buy conference tickets using traditional banking system and was
amused and slightly annoyed at the "block confirmation times" of
traditional banking - it takes days to confirm a payment. The sending
stops during weekends and "bank holidays". It maybe made sense when
actual people were involved, but just realizing that it is more
difficult to not process payments on the weekends these days is a funny
thought.

I remembered it yesterday, when my payment confirmation with 20 sat/B
fee took an hour to confirm. Late at night. I was slightly pissed and
thought "I should have used PayPal". The thing is that PayPal has much
higher fees, at least for the payment I wanted to do. Then I realized
how used I am to instant payments with relatively low fees. Do I care
if the blocks are 1MB or 8MB? Not a bit.

Am I saying that I am big(ger) blocker? Not at all. I am saying I don't
care. As long as it works, I let the market decide. And I will go with
the fork that has the largest number of users - the largest network.
And contrary to traditional banking system, I have a very easy choice.
No politician or central banker decided for me.

And this is the part of the crypto-culture that I like most. I even used
Theo's OpenBSD, even though he was a jerk insulting users. Because it
works.
